Reading the essays together in one sitting[1. specifically in seat 55K of QF17 to Los Angeles], what strikes me most is the absence of real clients from our thinking. Somewhere along the way from the <em>Design a Design <strong>Business</strong></em> to the <em>Architectural <strong>Office</strong> of the Future</em>, we got bogged down in questions of an operational nature (most commonly the technological side of our operations) and distracted from questions of business and strategy.

Sure, “the client” is there in our thoughts in an abstract, ghostly stick figure sort of way, usually failing to respect Architecture (with a capital “A”) one way or another, but real clients, the actual people with names and lives and careers of their own, who give us work and pay our bills, are missing. I mean the real estate cowboys who sit across from us in meetings, the slightly awkward sons and daughters of Chinese billionaires slowly buying up the inner suburbs, the people with gauche ambitions of owning power yachts and depressing abilities to obtain them. I’m talking about real clients, the kind we love to hate, but the kind we should learn to love if we want to be in business with more of them.

Because however much we tinker with our business model (and I do sincerely suspect that tinkering is all that will happen since I get the sense that more of our principals are uninterested in this process than are engaged with it), these clients, these real clients, are the only people who will decide whether to (continue to) engage us or not (whether as service providers, joint venture partners or otherwise), and are therefore the ultimate arbiters of the sustainability of our chosen model(s).

Allow me a statistical diversion for a moment. The construction and property industry as a whole exists to provide space for the people and businesses that make up our cities and towns. The amount invested in a city like Sydney or Melbourne every year is impressive. Figures from Cushman and Wakefield (<a href="http://globalurbanist.com/2014/02/03/saskia-sassen-right-to-the-city">http://globalurbanist.com/2014/02/03/saskia-sassen-right-to-the-city</a>) suggest that around US$11.4bn was invested in Sydney between mid-2013 and mid-2014. For Hong Kong that figure was US$13.7bn, for Shanghai US$9.9bn, Beijing US$8.0bn and Melbourne US$7.8bn. Compare these for scale to US$55.4bn invested in New York in the same 12 months, US$47.3bn in London and US$35.5bn in Tokyo.

Let’s say for the sake of round numbers (and very optimistically) that architects get a 2% slice of that pie. Say, for example, that all the big architecture firms in Sydney put together might have earned a total of US$228m in fees for the 2013-14 financial year, for major projects in this city. The question for the <em>Architecture <strong>Business</strong> of the Future</em> exercise is thus: are we looking for business models to chase a bigger slice of that US$228 million, or a bigger slice of that US$11.4 billion? And what type of pie are we chasing across the rest of Southeast Asia?

I propose that these two types of figures represent the only two sustainable business models available to an architecture company of our size: first, an architectural services company that makes its money on fees; and second, a property development company that enters into joint ventures with other, much larger developers, providing architectural services as part of its value adding to the development process, but which makes its money on the profits like everyone else. Only the latter enables us of pursuing a much more significant slice of the entire construction and real estate economy described above.

If we do want to go up in scale in this manner, then I suggest there is only one way to do this, both in this initial transition phase and later when we are in full swing. And that is to form permanent, more intimate professional bonds with the developers and property managers at the peaks of these industries, whether in Australia or Southeast Asia (or further abroad), by befriending them, partaking in their interests, their professional cultures, their social worlds, and encouraging them to reciprocate by drawing them into ours. In other words by loving them, without cynicism or resentment.

In Australia we have the basis for this—we have a name, we have worked with many people at all levels in probably all of the large property funds and developers in the country. We need to expand upon these to cultivate real relationships professionally and personally. In Southeast Asia however—where in fact this manner of networking is even more important—we have not even begun to follow the footsteps of the American and British firms that have so successfully made inroads into the region. That, I think, will be the test of our commitment to the region: that we begin to establish a permanent marketing team whose mission it is not only to produce expressions of interest day-in, day-out, but to travel throughout the region’s capital cities, meeting developers and investors each day, learning the social landscapes in their respective beats, and pressing for opportunities to be more than just another Anglo-American architectural services provider to a region sorely lacking in architectural ideas.